Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share, share, membership fee, and warehouse count data)
OVERVIEW
We believe that the most important driver of our profitability is sales growth, particularly comparable warehouse sales (comparable sales) growth. We define comparable sales as sales from warehouses open for more than one year, including remodels, relocations and expansions, as well as online sales related to websites operating for more than one year. Comparable sales growth is achieved through increasing shopping frequency from new and existing members and the amount they spend on each visit (average ticket). Sales comparisons can also be particularly influenced by certain factors that are beyond our control: fluctuations in currency exchange rates (with respect to the consolidation of the results of our international operations); and changes in the cost of gasoline and associated competitive conditions (primarily impacting our U.S. and Canadian operations). The higher our comparable sales exclusive of these items, the more we can leverage certain of our selling, general and administrative expenses, reducing them as a percentage of sales and enhancing profitability. Generating comparable sales growth is foremost a question of making available to our members the right merchandise at the right prices, a skill that we believe we have repeatedly demonstrated over the long term. Another substantial factor in sales growth is the health of the economies in which we do business, especially the United States. Sales growth and gross margins are also impacted by our competition, which is vigorous and widespread, across a wide range of global, national and regional wholesalers and retailers. While we cannot control or reliably predict general economic health or changes in competition, we believe that we have been successful historically in adapting our business to these changes, such as through adjustments to our pricing and to our merchandise mix, including increasing the penetration of our private label items. Our philosophy is to provide our members with quality goods and services at the most competitive prices. We do not focus in the short term on maximizing prices charged, but instead seek to maintain what we believe is a perception among our members of our “pricing authority” – consistently providing the most competitive values. Our investments in merchandise pricing can, from time to time, include reducing prices on merchandise to drive sales or meet competition and holding prices steady despite cost increases instead of passing the increases on to our members, all negatively impacting near-term gross margin as a percentage of net sales (gross margin percentage). We believe that our gasoline business draws members but it generally has a significantly lower gross margin percentage relative to our non-gasoline business. A higher penetration of gasoline sales will generally lower our gross margin percentage. Rapidly changing gasoline prices may significantly impact our near-term net sales growth. Generally, rising gasoline prices benefit net sales growth which, given the higher sales base, negatively impacts our gross margin percentage but decreases our selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales. A decline in gasoline prices has the inverse effect. We also achieve sales growth by opening new warehouses. As our warehouse base grows, available and desirable potential sites become more difficult to secure, and square footage growth becomes a comparatively less substantial component of growth. The negative aspects of such growth, however, including lower initial operating profitability relative to existing warehouses and cannibalization of sales at existing warehouses when openings occur in existing markets, are increasingly less significant relative to the results of our total operations. Our rate of square footage growth is higher in foreign markets, due to the smaller base in those markets, and we expect that to continue. Our online business growth both domestically and internationally has also increased our sales. Our membership format is an integral part of our business model and has a significant effect on our profitability. This format is designed to reinforce member loyalty and provide continuing fee revenue. The extent to which we achieve growth in our membership base, increase penetration of our Executive members, and sustain high renewal rates, materially influences our profitability. Our financial performance depends heavily on our ability to control costs. While we believe that we have achieved successes in this area historically, some significant costs are partially outside our control, most particularly health care and utility expenses. With respect to expenses relating to the compensation of our
19
10-K https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/909832/000090983215000014...
25 of 89 8/17/2018, 11:49 AM
Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share, share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
employees, our philosophy is not to seek to minimize the wages and benefits that they earn. Rather, we believe that achieving our longer-term objectives of reducing employee turnover and enhancing employee satisfaction requires maintaining compensation levels that are better than the industry average for much of our workforce. This may cause us, for example, to absorb costs that other employers might seek to pass through to their workforces. Because our business is operated on very low margins, modest changes in various items in the income statement, particularly gross margin and selling, general and administrative expenses, can have substantial impacts on net income. Our operating model is generally the same across our U.S., Canada, and Other International operating segments (see Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report). Certain countries in the Other International segment have relatively higher rates of square footage growth, lower wages and benefit costs as a percentage of country sales, and/or less or no direct membership warehouse competition. Additionally, we operate our lower-margin gasoline business in the U.S., Canada, Australia, U.K., and Japan. In discussions of our consolidated operating results, we refer to the impact of changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, which are references to the differences between the foreign-exchange rates we use to convert the financial results of our international operations from local currencies into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes. This impact of foreign-exchange rate changes is calculated based on the difference between the current period's currency exchange rates and the comparable prior-year period's currency exchange rates. We also refer to the impact of changes in gasoline prices on our net sales. This impact is calculated based on the difference between the current period's average gasoline price per gallon sold and the comparable prior-year period's average gasoline price per gallon sold. Our fiscal year ends on the Sunday closest to August 31. Fiscal years 2015, 2014 and 2013 were 52-week fiscal years ending on August 30, 2015, August 31, 2014 and September 1, 2013, respectively. Certain percentages presented are calculated using actual results prior to rounding. Unless otherwise noted, references to net income relate to net income attributable to Costco. Highlights for fiscal year 2015 included:
• We opened 23 net new warehouses in 2015, 12 in the U.S., one in Canada, and 10 in our Other International segment, compared to 29 net new warehouses in 2014; • Net sales increased 3% to $113,666, driven by sales at new warehouses opened in 2014 and 2015, and a 1% increase in comparable sales. Net and comparable sales results were negatively impacted by changes in all foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and decreases in the price of gasoline; • Membership fee revenue increased 4% to $2,533, primarily due to membership sign-ups at existing and new warehouses and executive membership upgrades, partially offset by the negative impact of changes in all foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar; • Gross margin as a percentage of net sales increased 43 basis points, primarily from the impact of gasoline price deflation on net sales as well as higher gross margins in our gasoline business; • Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses as a percentage of net sales increased 18 basis points; • Net income increased to $2,377, or $5.37 per diluted share compared to $2,058, or $4.65 per diluted share in 2014. The current year results were positively impacted by a $57 tax benefit, or $0.13 per diluted share, in connection with the special cash dividend paid to the Company's 401(k) Plan participants; • Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar adversely impacted diluted earnings per share by $0.28, primarily due to changes in the Canadian dollar; • In February 2015, we issued $1,000 in aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes, which partially funded a special cash dividend of $5.00 per share paid in February 2015 (approximately $2,201); and • The Board of Directors approved an increase in the quarterly cash dividend from $0.355 to $0.40 per share in April 2015.
Net Sales Net sales increased $3,454 or 3% during 2015. This was attributable to sales at new warehouses opened in 2014 and 2015 and a 1% increase in comparable warehouse sales. Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar negatively impacted net sales by approximately $3,344, or 303 basis points, compared to 2014. The negative impact was attributable to all foreign countries in which we operate, predominantly Canada of $2,027, Mexico of $385, and Japan of $368. Changes in gasoline prices negatively impacted net sales by approximately $2,902, or 263 basis points, due to a 22% decrease in the average sales price per gallon.
Comparable Sales Comparable sales increased 1% during 2015 and was positively impacted by an increase in shopping frequency partially offset by a decrease in the average ticket. The average ticket and comparable sales results were negatively impacted by changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a decrease in gasoline prices. The increase in comparable sales also includes the negative impact of cannibalization (established warehouses losing sales to our newly opened locations)2014 vs. 2013
Net Sales Net sales increased $7,342 or 7% during 2014. This was attributable to a 4% increase in comparable warehouse sales, and sales at warehouses opened in 2013 and 2014. Changes in foreign currencies negatively impacted net sales by approximately $1,336, or 130 basis points, compared to 2013. The negative impact was primarily due to the Canadian dollar of approximately $1,140 and the Japanese yen of approximately $311. Changes in gasoline prices negatively impacted net sales by approximately $364, or 35 basis points, due to a 3% decrease in the average sales price per gallon.
Comparable Sales Comparable sales increased 4% during 2014 and were primarily impacted by an increase in shopping frequency. Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and gasoline prices negatively impacted comparable sales results, including the average ticket during 2014. The increase in comparable sales also includes the negative impact of cannibalization (established warehouses losing sales to our newly opened locations), primarily in our Other International operations.
Membership Fees
2015 2014 2013 Membership fees 2015 vs. 2014 Membership fees increased 4% in 2015. This increase was primarily due to membership sign-ups at existing and new warehouses and increased number of upgrades to our higher-fee Executive Membership program. These increases were partially offset by changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, which negatively impacted membership fees by approximately $76 in 2015. Our member renewal rates are currently 91% in the U.S. and Canada and 88% worldwide.
2014 vs. 2013 Membership fees increased 6% in 2014. This increase was primarily due to membership sign-ups at existing and new warehouses and increased number of upgrades to our higher-fee Executive Membership program. The raising of our membership fees in fiscal 2012 positively impacted 2014 and 2013 by $9 and $119, respectively. These increases were partially offset by changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, which negatively impacted membership fees by approximately $35 in 2014.During 2015, the gross margin of our combined core merchandise categories (food and sundries, hardlines, softlines and fresh foods), when expressed as a percentage of core merchandise sales (rather than total net sales), increased five basis points, primarily due to increases in softlines and food and sundries, partially offset by a decrease in fresh foods. This measure eliminates the impact of changes in sales penetration and gross margins from our warehouse ancillary and other businesses. Our gross margin percentage increased 43 basis points compared to 2014 and most of the improvement was derived from the impact of gasoline price deflation on net sales. Excluding this impact, gross margin as a percentage of adjusted net sales was 10.81%, an increase of 15 basis points from the prior year. This increase is predominantly due to: an increase in our warehouse ancillary and other business gross margin of 23 basis points, due primarily to our gasoline business; partially offset by a negative contribution from core merchandise categories of 12 basis points, as a result of a decrease in their sales penetration. A LIFO benefit in 2015 compared to a charge in 2014 positively contributed five basis points. The LIFO benefit resulted largely from lower costs for gasoline. Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar negatively impacted gross margin by approximately $359 in 2015. Gross margin on a segment basis, when expressed as a percentage of the segment's own sales (segment gross margin percentage), increased in our U.S. operations, primarily due to our gasoline business, food and sundries merchandise category and the LIFO benefit discussed above. The segment gross margin percentage in our Canadian operations decreased, primarily in hardlines and softlines. The segment gross margin percentage in our Other International operations decreased, primarily in food and sundries.
2014 vs. 2013 During 2014, the gross margin of our combined core merchandise categories, when expressed as a percentage of core merchandise sales, increased seven basis points, primarily due to increases in our softlines and food and sundries categories, partially offset by a decrease in hardlines. Fresh foods also had a positive impact as a result of higher sales penetration. Our gross margin percentage increased four basis points compared to 2013 and most of the improvement was derived from the impact of gasoline price deflation on net sales. Excluding this impact, gross margin as a percentage of adjusted net sales was 10.63%, an increase of one basis point from the prior year. This increase is predominantly due to warehouse ancillary and other business gross margin of six basis points, which was largely offset by five basis points due to a LIFO charge in 2014 compared to a benefit in 2013. The LIFO charge resulted from higher costs for our merchandise inventories, primarily our foods and fresh foods categories. Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar negatively impacted gross margin by approximately $151 in 2014. Gross margin on a segment basis, when expressed as a percentage of the segment's own sales, increased in our U.S. operations, primarily due to our softlines and food and sundries categories, partially offset by a decrease in hardlines and the LIFO charge discussed above. The segment gross margin percentage in our Canadian operations decreased, primarily due to decreases in hardlines and food and sundries, partially offset by an increase in fresh foods. The segment gross margin percentage in our Other International operations increased, primarily due to fresh foods.
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales increased 18 basis points, mostly due to the negative impact of gasoline price deflation on net sales. Excluding this impact, SG&A expenses as a percentage of adjusted net sales were 9.82%, an improvement of seven basis points. This was due to lower warehouse operating costs of 16 basis points, primarily from improvements in payroll expenses in our core business as a result of leveraging increased sales. This improvement was partially offset by higher central operating costs of five basis points, predominantly due to increased depreciation and service contract costs associated with our information systems modernization projects that were placed into service during the year, primarily incurred by our U.S. operations. Our investment in modernizing our information systems is ongoing. Higher stock compensation expense also negatively impacted our SG&A expenses by four basis points, due to an appreciation in the trading price of our stock at the time of grant. Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar decreased our SG&A expenses by approximately $282 in 2015.
2014 vs. 2013 SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales increased seven basis points. Excluding the effect of gasoline price deflation on net sales, SG&A expenses as a percentage of adjusted net sales were 9.86%, an increase of four basis points. This increase was largely due to an increase in central operating costs of three basis points primarily due to continued investment in modernizing our information systems, primarily incurred by our U.S. operations. Stock compensation expense was also higher by two basis points due to accelerated vesting for long service and appreciation in the trading price of our stock at the time of grant, despite a 14% reduction in the average number of restricted stock units (RSUs) granted to each participant. Warehouse operating costs were lower by one basis point, primarily resulting from improvements in payroll in our Canadian operations as a result of leveraging increased sales, partially offset by increases in employee benefit costs, primarily health care, in our U.S. operations. Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar decreased our SG&A expenses by $119 in 2014.Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share, share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Interest Expense
2015 2014 2013 Interest expense $ 124 $ 113 $ 99
Interest expense in 2015 primarily relates to $1,100 of 5.5% Senior Notes issued in fiscal 2007, $3,500 of Senior Notes issued in December 2012, and $1,000 of Senior Notes issued in February 2015 (described in further detail under the heading “Cash Flows from Financing Activities” and in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report).
Interest Income and Other, Net
2015 2014 2013 Interest income $ 50 $ 52 $ 44 Foreign-currency transaction gains, net 47 26 39 Other, net 7 12 14 Interest income and other, net $ 104 $ 90 $ 97
2015 vs. 2014 The increase in net foreign-currency transaction gains was primarily attributable to favorable mark-to-market adjustments for forward foreign exchange contracts compared to the prior year. See Derivatives and Foreign Currency sections in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report. The increase was also attributable to net gains on the revaluation or settlement of monetary assets and liabilities during the year.
2014 vs. 2013 The increase in interest income in 2014 was primarily driven by higher average cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments balances, primarily in our U.S. operations. The decrease in net foreign-currency transaction gains was primarily attributable to the revaluation or settlement of monetary assets and monetary liabilities during the year, primarily our Japanese subsidiary's U.S. dollar-denominated payables.
Provision for Income Taxes
2015 2014 2013 Provision for income taxes $ 1,195 $ 1,109 $ 990 Effective tax rate 33.2% 34.7% 32.4%
Our provision for income taxes in 2015 and 2013 were favorably impacted by net tax benefits of $68 and $77, respectively, primarily due to tax benefits recorded in connection with special cash dividends paid to employees through our 401(K) Retirement Plan. Dividends paid on these shares are deductible for U.S. income tax purposes. There was no similar special cash dividend in 2014.
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows generated from warehouse operations, cash and cash equivalents and short-term investment balances. Cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were $6,419 and $7,315 at the end of 2015 and 2014, respectively. Of these balances, approximately $1,243 and $1,383 at the end of 2015 and 2014, respectively, represented debit and credit card receivables, primarily related to sales in the last week of our fiscal year. Cash and cash equivalents were negatively impacted by changes in exchange rates by $418 and $11, respectively. We have not provided for U.S. deferred taxes on cumulative undistributed earnings of certain non-U.S. consolidated subsidiaries because our subsidiaries have invested or will invest the undistributed earnings indefinitely, or the earnings if repatriated would not result in a deferred tax liability. This includes the remaining undistributed earnings of our Canadian operations that management maintains are indefinitely reinvested, or could be repatriated without resulting in a deferred tax liability. Deferred taxes are recorded for earnings of our foreign operations when we determine that such earnings are no longer indefinitely reinvested. During 2015, we repatriated a portion of the earnings in our Canadian operations that in 2014 were no longer considered indefinitely reinvested. In the fourth quarter of 2015, we changed our position regarding an additional portion of the undistributed earnings of our Canadian operations, which are no longer considered indefinitely reinvested. Current exchange rates compared to historical rates when these earnings were generated resulted in an immaterial U.S. tax benefit, which was recorded at the end of 2015. Management believes that our cash position and operating cash flows will be sufficient to meet our liquidity and capital requirements for the foreseeable future. We believe that our U.S. current and projected asset position is sufficient to meet our U.S. liquidity requirements and have no current plans to repatriate for use in the U.S. cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments held by these non-U.S. consolidated subsidiaries whose earnings are considered indefinitely reinvested. Cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments held at these subsidiaries and considered to be indefinitely reinvested totaled $1,196 at August 30, 2015.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities totaled $4,285 in 2015 compared to $3,984 in 2014. Our cash flow provided by operations is primarily derived from net sales and membership fees. Our cash flow used in operations generally consists of payments to our merchandise vendors, warehouse operating costs including payroll and employee benefits, credit card processing fees, and utilities. Cash used in operations also includes payments for income taxes. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities for 2015 when compared to 2014 was primarily due to stronger earnings.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities totaled $2,480 in 2015 compared to $2,093 in 2014. Our cash flow used in investing activities is primarily related to funding our warehouse expansion and remodeling activities. Net cash flows from investing activities also includes purchases and maturities of short-term investments.
Capital Expenditure Plans We opened 23 new warehouses, relocated two warehouses, and converted an existing warehouse to a business center in 2015 and plan to open up to 32 new warehouses in 2016 and relocate up to five
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share, share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
warehouses. Our primary requirement for capital is acquiring land, buildings, and equipment for new and remodeled warehouses. To a lesser extent, capital is required for initial warehouse operations, the modernization of our information systems, and working capital. In 2015 we spent $2,393 on capital expenditures, and it is our current intention to spend approximately $2,800 to $3,000 during fiscal 2016. These expenditures are expected to be financed with cash from operations, existing cash and cash equivalents, and short-term investments. There can be no assurance that current expectations will be realized and plans are subject to change upon further review of our capital expenditure needs.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities totaled $2,324 in 2015 compared to $786 in 2014. The primary uses of cash in 2015 were dividend payments of $2,865, which includes a $5.00 per share special cash dividend, repurchases of common stock, and payment of withholding taxes on stock-based awards. Net cash used in financing activities was partially offset by the issuance of $1,000 in Senior Notes.
In February 2015, we issued $1,000 in aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes as follows: $500 of 1.75% Senior Notes due February 15, 2020, and $500 of 2.25% Senior Notes due February 15, 2022. The proceeds were used to pay a portion of the special cash dividend on February 27, 2015.
Stock Repurchase Programs In April 2015, our Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program in the amount of $4,000, which expires in April 2019. This authorization revoked previously authorized but unused amounts, totaling $2,528. During 2015 and 2014, we repurchased 3,456,000 and 2,915,000 shares of common stock, at an average price of $142.87 and $114.45, totaling approximately $494 and $334, respectively. The remaining amount available to be purchased under our approved plan was $3,699 at the end of 2015. Purchases are made from time-to-time, as conditions warrant, in the open market or in block purchases and pursuant to plans under SEC Rule 10b5-1. Repurchased shares are retired, in accordance with the Washington Business Corporation Act.
Dividends Our cash dividends paid in 2015 totaled $6.51 per share, as compared to $1.33 per share in 2014. In April 2015, our Board of Directors increased our quarterly cash dividend from $0.355 to $0.40 per share. Additionally, in 2015, our Board of Directors declared and paid a special cash dividend of $5.00 per share, totaling approximately $2,201.
Bank Credit Facilities and Commercial Paper Programs We maintain bank credit facilities for working capital and general corporate purposes. At August 30, 2015, we had borrowing capacity within these facilities of $407, of which $337 was maintained by our international operations. Of the $337, $153 is guaranteed by the Company. There were no outstanding short-term borrowings under the bank credit facilities at the end of 2015 and 2014. The Company has letter of credit facilities, for commercial and standby letters of credit, totaling $149. The outstanding commitments under these facilities at the end of 2015 totaled $90, including $89 in standby letters of credit with expiration dates within one year. The bank credit facilities have various expiration dates, all within one year, and we generally intend to renew these facilities prior to their expiration. The amount of borrowings available at any time under our bank credit facilities is reduced by the amount of standby and commercial letters of credit then outstanding.
27
10-K https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/909832/000090983215000014...
35 of 89 8/17/2018, 11:49 AM
Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share, share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Contractual Obligations As of August 30, 2015, our commitments to make future payments under contractual obligations were as follows:
Payments Due by Fiscal Year
Contractual obligations 2016 2017 to 2018 2019 to 2020
2021 and thereafter Total Long-term debt(1) $ 1,407 $ 2,449 $ 1,855 $ 834 $ 6,545 Purchase obligations (merchandise)(2) 6,424 5 — — 6,429 Operating leases (3) 187 359 321 2,097 2,964 Construction and land obligations 744 43 10 — 797 Capital lease obligations(4) 24 48 47 452 571 Purchase obligations (equipment, services and other)(5) 326 38 11 5 380 Other(6) 18 29 8 58 113 Total $ 9,130 $ 2,971 $ 2,252 $ 3,446 $ 17,799 _______________ (1) Includes contractual interest payments. (2) Includes only open merchandise purchase orders. (3) Operating lease obligations exclude amounts for common area maintenance, taxes, and insurance and have been reduced by $131 to reflect sub-lease income. (4) Includes build-to-suit lease obligations and contractual interest payments. (5) The amounts exclude certain services negotiated at the individual warehouse or regional level that are not significant and generally contain clauses allowing for cancellation without significant penalty. (6) Includes $54 in asset retirement obligations, and $54 in deferred compensation obligations. The total amount excludes $103 of non-current unrecognized tax contingencies and $22 of other obligations due to uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash payments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that in the opinion of management have had, or are reasonably likely to have, a material current or future effect on our financial condition or consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP) requires that we make estimates and judgments including those related to revenue recognition, merchandise inventory valuation, impairment of long-lived assets, insurance/self-insurance liabilities, and income taxes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable and we continue to review and evaluate these statements. For further information on significant accounting policies, see discussion in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report.
Revenue Recognition We generally recognize sales, which include shipping fees where applicable, net of returns, at the time the member takes possession of merchandise or receives services. When we collect payment from customers prior to the transfer of ownership of merchandise or the performance of services, the amount is generally recorded as deferred sales in the consolidated balance sheets until the sale or service is completed. We provide for estimated sales returns based on historical trends and reduce sales and merchandise costs
28
10-K https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/909832/000090983215000014...
36 of 89 8/17/2018, 11:49 AM
Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share, share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
accordingly. Our sales returns reserve is based on an estimate of the net realizable value of merchandise inventories to be returned. Amounts collected from members for sales and value added taxes are recorded on a net basis. We evaluate whether it is appropriate to record the gross amount of merchandise sales and related costs or a net amount. Generally, when we are the primary obligor, subject to inventory risk, have latitude in establishing prices and selecting suppliers, influence product or service specifications, or have several but not all of these indicators, revenue is recorded on a gross basis. If we are not the primary obligor and do not possess other indicators of gross reporting as noted above, we record a net amount, which is reflected in net sales. We record related shipping fees on a gross basis. We account for membership fee revenue, net of refunds, on a deferred basis, whereby revenue is recognized ratably over one-year. Our Executive members qualify for a 2% reward on qualified purchases (up to a maximum reward of approximately $750 per year), which can be redeemed only at Costco warehouses. We account for this reward as a reduction in sales. The sales reduction and corresponding liability are computed after giving effect to the estimated impact of non-redemptions based on historical data.
Merchandise Inventories Merchandise inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market, as determined primarily by the retail inventory method, and are stated using the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method for substantially all U.S. merchandise inventories. We record an adjustment each quarter, if necessary, for the estimated effect of inflation or deflation, and these estimates are adjusted to actual results determined at year-end. We believe the LIFO method more fairly presents the results of operations by more closely matching current costs with current revenues. Merchandise inventories for all foreign operations are primarily valued by the retail inventory method and are stated using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method. We provide for estimated inventory losses (shrink) between physical inventory counts as a percentage of net sales. The provision is adjusted periodically to reflect results of the actual physical inventory counts, which generally occur in the second and fourth quarters of the year. Inventory cost, where appropriate, is reduced by estimates of vendor rebates when earned or as we progress toward earning those rebates, provided they are probable and reasonably estimable. Other consideration received from vendors is generally recorded as a reduction of merchandise costs upon completion of contractual milestones, terms of agreement, or other systematic and rational approaches.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets We evaluate our long-lived assets for impairment on an annual basis, when relocating or closing a facility, or when events or changes in circumstances occur that may indicate the carrying amount of the asset group, generally an individual warehouse, may not be fully recoverable. Our judgments are based on existing market and operational conditions. Future events could cause us to conclude that impairment factors exist, requiring a downward adjustment of these assets to their then-current fair value.
Insurance/Self-Insurance Liabilities We use a combination of insurance and self-insurance mechanisms, including for certain risks, a wholly-owned captive insurance subsidiary and participation in a reinsurance program, to provide for potential liabilities for workers’ compensation, general liability, property damage, directors’ and officers’ liability, vehicle liability, and employee health care benefits. Liabilities associated with the risks that we retain are not discounted and are estimated, in part, by considering historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other actuarial assumptions. The estimated accruals for these liabilities could be significantly affected if future occurrences and claims differ from these assumptions and historical trends.
Income Taxes The determination of our provision for income taxes requires significant judgment, the use of estimates, and the interpretation and application of complex tax laws. Significant judgment is required in assessing the
29
10-K https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/909832/000090983215000014...
37 of 89 8/17/2018, 11:49 AM
Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share, share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
timing and amounts of deductible and taxable items and the probability of sustaining uncertain tax positions. The benefits associated with uncertain tax positions are recorded in our consolidated financial statements only after determining a more-likely-than-not probability that the positions will withstand challenge from tax authorities. Additionally, certain of our cumulative foreign undistributed earnings are considered indefinitely reinvested. These earnings would be subject to U.S. income tax if we changed our position and could result in a U.S. deferred tax liability. When facts and circumstances change, we reassess these positions and record any changes in the consolidated financial statements as appropriate.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report for a detailed description of recent accounting pronouncements.
Item 7A—Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk (amounts in millions) Our exposure to financial market risk results from fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. We do not engage in speculative or leveraged transactions or hold or issue financial instruments for trading purposes.
Interest Rate Risk Our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to our investment holdings that are diversified among various instruments considered to be cash equivalents as defined in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report, as well as short-term investments in government and agency securities, and asset and mortgage-backed securities with effective maturities of generally three months to five years at the date of purchase. The primary objective of our investment activities is to preserve principal and secondarily to generate yields. The majority of our short-term investments are in fixed interest rate securities. These securities are subject to changes in fair value due to interest rate fluctuations. Our Board of Directors have approved a policy that limits investments in the U.S. to direct U.S. government and government agency obligations, repurchase agreements collateralized by U.S. government and government agency obligations, and U.S. government and government agency money market funds. Our wholly-owned captive insurance subsidiary invests in U.S. government and government agency obligations, corporate notes and bonds, and asset and mortgage-backed securities with a minimum overall portfolio average credit rating of AA+. Our Canadian and Other International subsidiaries’ investments are primarily in money market funds, bankers’ acceptances and bank certificates of deposit, generally denominated in their local currencies. We performed a sensitivity analysis to determine the impact that a 100 basis-point change in interest rates would have on the value of our investment portfolio. At the end of 2015, the incremental change in the fair market value was $27. For those investments that are classified as available-for-sale, the unrealized gains or losses related to fluctuations in market volatility and interest rates are reflected within stockholders’ equity in accumulated other comprehensive income. The nature and amount of our long-term debt may vary as a result of future business requirements, market conditions, and other factors. As of the end of 2015, the majority of our long-term debt is fixed rate Senior Notes, carried at $5,596. Fluctuations in interest rates may affect the fair value of the fixed-rate debt. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report for more information on our long-term debt.
Foreign Currency-Exchange Risk Our foreign subsidiaries conduct certain transactions in their non-functional currencies, which exposes us to fluctuations in exchange rates. We manage these fluctuations, in part, through the use of forward foreign-exchange contracts, seeking to economically hedge the impact of fluctuations of foreign exchange on known future expenditures denominated in a non-functional foreign-currency. The contracts are intended primarily